.TH AUTOLINT 1 "2026-06-30" "checkrun" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
autolint \- lint supported files through Checkrun policy
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B autolint
.RB [ --fix ]
.RB [ --json ]
.RI [ -h | --help ]
.I file
.RI [ file ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B autolint
lints each supplied file with the Checkrun-selected fast linter for that
filetype. Unsupported files, ignored files, missing files, and files whose
linter is not installed are skipped rather than treated as hard failures.
.PP
When
.B --json
is used, diagnostics are emitted as structured records for editor adapters.
Human-readable output is reserved for terminal use.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --fix
Allow supported linters to apply safe fixes.
.TP
.B --json
Print JSON diagnostic records instead of human-readable output.
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Show usage and supported file types.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CHECKRUN_AUTOLINT_JOBS
Maximum number of lint jobs to run concurrently.
.TP
.B CHECKRUN_CONFIG_DIR
Directory for local Checkrun ignore and schema policy. Defaults to
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/checkrun
when the XDG root is absolute, or
.I ~/.config/checkrun
otherwise.
.TP
.B CHECKRUN_PYTHON
Python interpreter used by Python-backed Checkrun helpers.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Linting completed, or all files were skipped for non-fatal reasons.
.TP
.B 1
One or more selected linters reported diagnostics or failed, or required lint
infrastructure such as
.B yq
or
.B jq
was unavailable.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error or registry planning failure.
.TP
.B 127
A required runtime dependency, such as a suitable Python interpreter, is missing.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR checkrun (1),
.BR autoformat (1)
