.TH CHECKRUN 1 "2026-06-30" "checkrun" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
checkrun \- shared formatter, linter, schema, and verification policy
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B checkrun
.I command
.RI [ args ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B checkrun
is the policy entry point for fast editor checks and broader project
verification. It owns filetype inference, formatter and linter selection,
schema association policy, and generic analyzer dispatch so editors, Sley,
Git hooks, and agents do not need to duplicate that logic.
.PP
The
.B format
and
.B lint
commands are compatibility entry points for
.BR autoformat (1)
and
.BR autolint (1).
The
.B check
command is an alias for
.BR lint .
.PP
.B verify
is a broader project verification stage. It accepts changed files and lets
Checkrun decide which configured project analyzers apply to those files.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B registry --json
Print raw Checkrun registry metadata.
.TP
.B capabilities [--json]
Print generated capability metadata for editor and integration adapters.
.TP
.B plan --json [--phase format|lint] FILE...
Emit formatter and linter execution plans without running tools.
.TP
.B explain [--json] FILE...
Explain formatter, linter, and schema policy for paths.
.TP
.B schema
Run schema maintenance commands such as refreshing pinned public schemas.
.TP
.B verify [--json] [--tool TOOL] [PATH...]
Run explicit project verification checks selected from the changed-file scope.
.TP
.B format
or
.B fmt
Run the autoformat compatibility entry point.
.TP
.B lint
Run the autolint compatibility entry point.
.TP
.B check
Alias for
.BR lint .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CHECKRUN_CONFIG_DIR
Directory for local Checkrun policy files such as ignore lists and schema
associations. Defaults to the user's XDG config location.
.TP
.B CHECKRUN_PYTHON
Python interpreter used by Python-backed Checkrun helpers.
.TP
.B CHECKRUN_AUTOLINT_JOBS
Parallelism for
.BR autolint (1).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
The command completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
One or more selected checks failed.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error, invalid local configuration, or missing required structured-output
flag.
.TP
.B 127
A required runtime dependency, such as a suitable Python interpreter, is missing.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR autoformat (1),
.BR autolint (1)
